.TH CSED 1 "May 2026" "csed" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
csed \- fast sed-compatible stream editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B csed
[\fIOPTION\fR]... \fISCRIPT\fR [\fIFILE\fR]...
.br
.B csed
[\fIOPTION\fR]... \fB-e\fR \fISCRIPT\fR... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.br
.B csed
[\fIOPTION\fR]... \fB-f\fR \fISCRIPTFILE\fR... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B csed
is a fast, sed-compatible stream editor implemented in C++23.
It supports the POSIX sed command set together with several GNU sed
extensions, including
.BR e ,
.BR F ,
.BR Q ,
.BR R ,
.BR T ,
.BR W ,
.BR z ,
step addresses of the form
.BR first~step ,
and replacement escapes such as
.BR \eL ,
.BR \eU ,
.BR \el ,
.BR \eu ,
and
.BR \eE .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-e " script" ", " \-\-expression " script"
Add an inline script.
.TP
.BI \-f " scriptfile" ", " \-\-file " scriptfile"
Read commands from a script file.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-quiet ", " \-\-silent
Suppress default printing of pattern space.
.TP
.BR \-E ", " \-r ", " \-\-regexp\-extended
Use extended regular expressions.
.TP
.BR \-i [ SUFFIX ]
Edit files in place. If
.I SUFFIX
is provided, keep a backup with that suffix.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-separate
Treat input files as separate streams.
.TP
.BR \-z ", " \-\-null\-data
Use NUL as the line delimiter.
.TP
.BR \-\-sandbox
Disable commands that touch the shell or filesystem:
.BR e ,
.BR r ,
.BR R ,
.BR w ,
and
.BR W .
.TP
.BR \-\-help
Show usage information and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Replace text in stdin:
.B echo 'alpha beta' | csed 's/beta/gamma/'
.TP
Print only matching lines:
.B csed \-n '/error/p' app.log
.TP
Edit a file in place and keep a backup:
.B csed \-i.bak 's/localhost/db.internal/g' config.ini
.TP
Use extended regex syntax:
.B printf 'cat\en cot\en cut\en' | csed \-E '/c(a|o)t/p'
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/csed
Default installed executable location.
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/man/man1/csed.1
Default installed manual page location.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success. Non-zero status is returned on parse errors,
I/O failures, regex compilation failures, or explicit
.B q
/
.B Q
exit-code requests in the script.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sed (1)
